src/built-with-assemblyscript.md, before:

---
description: A place for all things AssemblyScript. Feel free to add your projects and applications, in alphabetical order.
---

# Built with AssemblyScript

A place for all things AssemblyScript. Feel free to add your projects and applications.

## Benchmarks

* [webassembly-wave](https://github.com/jtiscione/webassembly-wave) \([demo](https://jtiscione.github.io/webassembly-wave/index.html)\)<br />
  JavaScript vs WebAssembly performance comparison - wave equation demo \(JS, C++, AssemblyScript\).
* [Eratosthenes](https://github.com/t-katsumura/webassembly-examples-eratosthenes)<br />
  WebAssembly examples which calculate prime by Sieve of Eratosthenes.
* [WasmBoy Benchmark](https://wasmboy.app/benchmark/)<br />
  Benchmarking WasmBoy emulator.
* [wasm-n-body](https://github.com/w8r/wasm-n-body)<br />
  WebAssembly N-body simulation benchmark _\(use 1000 bodies compare to original\)._
* [as-benchmarks](https://github.com/nischayv/as-benchmarks) \([demo](https://nischayv.github.io/as-benchmarks/index.html)\)<br />
  A set of computational benchmarks \(JS, AssemblyScript\).
* [Sort Colors Benchmark](https://github.com/manueldois/WebAssembly/tree/master/Sort%20Colors%20Benchmark/src) \([demo](https://manueldois.github.io/WebAssembly/Sort%20Colors%20Benchmark/dist/index.html)\)<br />
  Bench of sorting random colors by hue component on 2d canvas.
* [Wasm Mandelbrot](https://github.com/ColinEberhardt/wasm-mandelbrot) \([demo](https://colineberhardt.github.io/wasm-mandelbrot/#AssemblyScript)\)<br />
  A mandelbrot rendered using a variety of WebAssembly tools \(emscripten, AssemblyScript, asm.js, etc ...\)

## Blockchain

* [ASContract / subscript](https://github.com/ascontract/subscript)<br />
  Substrate smart contract framework written in AssemblyScript.
* [eWasm / Biturbo](https://github.com/ewasm/biturbo)<br />
  Eth1 EE using Turboproofs.
* [ewasm / scout.ts ](https://github.com/ewasm/scout.ts)<br />
  Scout is a Ethereum 2.0 Phase 2 execution prototyping engine \(AssemblyScript Port\).
* [NearProtocol / near-sdk-as](https://github.com/near/near-sdk-as)<br />
  AssemblyScript tools for writing smart contracts for NearProtocol.
* [GraphProtocol / graph-ts](https://github.com/graphprotocol/graph-ts)<br />
  TypeScript/AssemblyScript library for writing mappings for [The Graph](https://thegraph.com).
* [ChainSafe / as-sha256](https://github.com/ChainSafe/as-sha256)<br />
  AssemblyScript implementation of SHA256 for [Lodestar](https://github.com/ChainSafe/lodestar).
* [ParityTech / srml-contracts-waterfall](https://github.com/paritytech/srml-contracts-waterfall)<br />
  Collection of simple Substrate smart contract examples written in Rust and AssemblyScript and tests for Substrates SRML Contracts module.

## Build Tools

* [Zwitterion](https://github.com/lastmjs/zwitterion)<br />
  A web dev server that lets you import anything\*.
* [rollup-plugin-assemblyscript](https://github.com/surma/rollup-plugin-assemblyscript)<br />
  A Rollup plugin that allows you to import AssemblyScript files and compiles them on-the-fly.
* [as-loader](https://github.com/piotr-oles/as-loader)<br />
  A webpack loader for AssemblyScript
* [visitor-as](https://github.com/willemneal/visitor-as)<br />
  Tools for creating compiler transformers.

## Editors

* [Fastly Terrarium](https://wasm.fastlylabs.com/)<br />
  A compilation toolchain and sandbox to run WebAssembly server-side, with native support for AssemblyScript.
* [NEAR Protocol Examples](https://examples.near.org/)<br />
  Examples that use [GitPod](https://gitpod.io/) to develop and deploy distributed web apps using NEAR smart contracts authored in AssemblyScript.
* [Iodide Notebook](https://alpha.iodide.io/notebooks/1234)<br />
  Experimental tool for scientific communication and exploration on the web \([more](https://hacks.mozilla.org/2019/03/iodide-an-experimental-tool-for-scientific-communicatiodide-for-scientific-communication-exploration-on-the-web)\).

## Emulators

* [wasmBoy](https://github.com/torch2424/wasmBoy) \([demo](https://wasmboy.app/)\)<br />
  Game Boy / Game Boy Color Emulator Library, written for WebAssembly using AssemblyScript.
* [Atari 2600](https://github.com/ColinEberhardt/atari2600-wasm)<br />
  An Atari 2600 emulator written in AssemblyScript compiled to WebAssembly.
* [as-spectrum-engine](https://github.com/Dotneteer/as-spectrum-engine)<br />
  AssemblyScript implementation of a ZX Spectrum emulator engine.

## Games

* [Chess](https://github.com/mhonert/chess) \([play](https://mhonert.github.io/chess)\)<br />
  A free and open source chess game using AssemblyScript and React.
* [Gomoku WASM](https://github.com/jolestar/gomoku-wasm) \([play](http://jolestar.com/gomoku-wasm)\)<br />
  A Gomoku game implements with WebAssembly using [as2d](https://github.com/as2d/as2d).
* [2d-videogame-in-assemblyscript](https://github.com/ttulka/2d-videogame-in-assemblyscript)<br />
  Demo 2D videogame in AssemblyScript.
* [fiberoptic-game](https://github.com/ameliabradley/fiberoptic-game)<br />
  Web game produced with AssemblyScript for js13k 2018.

## Graphics / Game Frameworks

* [as2d](https://github.com/as2d/as2d)<br />
  \[_Deprecated_\] Bring the power of the CanvasRenderingContext2D prototype to AssemblyScript.
* [koora](https://github.com/mrchantey/koora)<br />
  Assemblyscript 3D Game Framework.
* [as-smallpt](https://github.com/01alchemist/as-smallpt)<br />
  Port of C++ smallpt, a path tracing renderer.
* [Babylon.Font](https://github.com/ycw/Babylon.Font)<br />
  Create 3d text in BabylonJS.
* [Path-Finder](https://github.com/Tugcga/Path-Finder/tree/main/assemblyscript)<br />
  AssemblyScript NavMesh Path Finder.
* [seam-carving-as](https://github.com/alexvictoor/seam-carving-as)<br />
  Seam Carving experiments with AssemblyScript.
* [ASWebGLue](https://github.com/battlelinegames/ASWebGLue)<br />
  WebGL bindings for AssemblyScript.
* [GLAS](https://github.com/lume/glas)<br />
  Web**GL** in **A**ssembly**S**cript, port of [Three.js](https://github.com/mrdoob/three.js/) to AssemblyScript.

## Data Serialization / Deserialization

* [karmem](https://github.com/inkeliz/karmem)<br />
  Karmem is a fast binary serialization format, faster than Google Flatbuffers and optimized for WebAssembly languages.
* [as-proto](https://github.com/piotr-oles/as-proto)<br />
  Protobuf encoder/decoder library.
* [as-json](https://github.com/JairusSW/as-json)<br />
  JSON encoder / decoder.
* [as-msgpack](https://github.com/wapc/as-msgpack)<br />
  MessagePack package for AssemblyScript.
* [assemblyscript-bson](https://github.com/nearprotocol/assemblyscript-bson)<br />
  BSON encoder / decoder.
* [assemblyscript-json](https://github.com/nearprotocol/assemblyscript-json)<br />
  JSON encoder / decoder.
* [AS-LZMA](https://github.com/01alchemist/AS-LZMA)<br />
  LZMA Decoder written in AssemblyScript.

## Crypto (non-blockchain)

* [superfasthash](https://github.com/mjethani/superfasthash)<br />
  An implementation of the SuperFastHash non-cryptographic hashing algorithm in JavaScript and WebAssembly.
* [WASM-Crypto](https://github.com/jedisct1/wasm-crypto)<br />
  An AssemblyScript set of cryptographic primitives for building authentication and key exchange protocols.
* [rabin-wasm](https://github.com/hugomrdias/rabin-wasm)<br />
  Rabin fingerprinting implemented in WASM _\(used by js-ipfs\)_.
* [xoroshiro128starstar](https://github.com/krisselden/xoroshiro128starstar)<br />
  An AssemblyScript port of xoroshiro128starstar.c

## Fixed & Arbitrary Precision Arithmetics

* [as-bignum](https://github.com/MaxGraey/as-bignum)<br />
  Fixed length big numbers like `u128`, `i256`, `fp128` and etc for AssemblyScript.
* [as-big](https://github.com/ttulka/as-big)<br />
  An AssemblyScript library for arbitrary-precision decimal arithmetic.
* [as-bigint](https://github.com/polywrap/as-bigint)<br />
  BigInt is an AssemblyScript class for math with arbitrarily large integers.
* [as-bignumber](https://github.com/polywrap/as-bignumber)<br />
  An AssemblyScript class for math with arbitrary-precision decimal and integer numbers.

## Language Extensions and Types

* [as-container](https://github.com/yjhmelody/as-container) <br />
  AssemblyScript version of Rust Option&lt;T> and Result<O, E> etc.
* [as-variant](https://github.com/MaxGraey/as-variant)<br />
  Variant (aka Any) data type for AssemblyScript.

## Bindings

* [asdom](https://github.com/lume/asdom)<br />
  DOM bindings for AssemblyScript.
* [ecmassembly](https://github.com/aspkg/ecmassembly)<br />
  Bindings for common ECMAScript/JavaScript APIs that require host scheduling (`setTimeout`, `Promise`, etc).
* [wasmbind](https://github.com/miracle2k/wasmbind)<br />
  Work with AssemblyScript memory and classes from Python.
* [as-bind](https://github.com/torch2424/as-bind)<br />
  \[_Deprecated_\] Isomorphic library to handle passing high-level data structures between AssemblyScript and JavaScript, built on top of the AssemblyScript loader.

## Other Libraries

* [ASTL](https://github.com/samchon/astl)<br />
  \[_Deprecated_\] Migration project from C++ STL (Standard Template Library) to AssemblyScript. Containers, iterators, algorithms and functors are supported.
* [Levenshtein Wasm](https://github.com/kyranet/levenshtein-wasm)<br />
  An experimental lightning-fast Wasm-compiled levenshtein library.
* [as-wasi](https://github.com/jedisct1/as-wasi)<br />
  An AssemblyScript API layer for WASI system calls.
* [galois](https://github.com/GuildOfWeavers/galois)<br />
  Arithmetic and polynomial operations in finite fields.
* [merkle](https://github.com/GuildOfWeavers/merkle)<br />
  Merkle tree and other data structures.
* [pixelmatch-asc](https://github.com/jamesmilneruk/pixelmatch-asc)<br />
  Pixel level image comparison library.
* [wasmer-as](https://github.com/onsails/wasmer-as)<br />
  Helpers for dealing with assemblyscript memory inside wasmer-runtime.
* [wasmer3-as](https://github.com/poria-cat/wasmer3-assemblyscript-example)<br/>
  Examples of lift string and lower string in wasmer 3.0
* [io-devices-lib](https://github.com/wasmerio/io-devices-lib)<br />
  Library for interacting with the Wasmer Experimental IO Devices.
* [as-string-sink](https://github.com/MaxGraey/as-string-sink)<br />
  An efficient dynamically sized string buffer (aka String Builder) for AssemblyScript.

## Embedded / IoT

* [wasm3-arduino](https://github.com/wasm3/wasm3-arduino/tree/main/wasm_apps)<br />
  Usage example with wasm3 which run on Arduino, PlatformIO, Particle.
* [Wasm3\_RGB\_Lamp](https://github.com/vshymanskyy/Wasm3_RGB_Lamp)<br />
  Animating an RGB lamp, using WebAssembly \(AssemblyScript\).
* [wasm-arduino-wifi](https://github.com/alvarowolfx/wasm-arduino-wifi)<br />
  Example how update WebAssembly via WiFi on arduino.

## Testing / Benchmarking

* [as-tral](https://github.com/romdotdog/as-tral)<br />
  AssemblyScript benchmarking library inspired by criterion.rs. (Required AssemblyScript >= 0.20)
* [as-pect](https://github.com/jtenner/as-pect)<br />
  A test framework inspired by jest. (Required AssemblyScript <= 0.19)
* [envy](https://github.com/jtenner/envy)<br />
  A test framework spiritual successor of as-pect. (Required AssemblyScript >= 0.20)

## Project Templates

* [worker-assemblyscript-template](https://github.com/JamesLMilner/worker-assemblyscript-template)<br />
  A Cloudflare wrangler template for a AssemblyScript worker.

## Applications

* [wasm-matrix](https://github.com/torch2424/wasm-matrix)<br />
  A Matrix effect in your terminal using AssemblyScript and WASI, deployed to WAPM.
* [WebAssembly music experiment](https://petersalomonsen.com)<br />
  A live coding environment in the browser for sequencing music with javascript and synthesizing instruments in AssemblyScript. Demonstrates compiling AssemblyScript directly in the browser, and live hot-swapping of webassembly modules.
* [WireWorld](https://github.com/dested/WireWorld) \([demo](https://dested.com/projects/wire/)\)<br />
  The Wireworld Computer in Javascript/Canvas.

Commit message:

Added a new section `Demoscene` to `built-with-assemblyscript.md` in order to accommodate an AssemblyScrip/WASM demo

src/built-with-assemblyscript.md, after:

---
description: A place for all things AssemblyScript. Feel free to add your projects and applications, in alphabetical order.
---

# Built with AssemblyScript

A place for all things AssemblyScript. Feel free to add your projects and applications.

## Benchmarks

* [webassembly-wave](https://github.com/jtiscione/webassembly-wave) \([demo](https://jtiscione.github.io/webassembly-wave/index.html)\)<br />
  JavaScript vs WebAssembly performance comparison - wave equation demo \(JS, C++, AssemblyScript\).
* [Eratosthenes](https://github.com/t-katsumura/webassembly-examples-eratosthenes)<br />
  WebAssembly examples which calculate prime by Sieve of Eratosthenes.
* [WasmBoy Benchmark](https://wasmboy.app/benchmark/)<br />
  Benchmarking WasmBoy emulator.
* [wasm-n-body](https://github.com/w8r/wasm-n-body)<br />
  WebAssembly N-body simulation benchmark _\(use 1000 bodies compare to original\)._
* [as-benchmarks](https://github.com/nischayv/as-benchmarks) \([demo](https://nischayv.github.io/as-benchmarks/index.html)\)<br />
  A set of computational benchmarks \(JS, AssemblyScript\).
* [Sort Colors Benchmark](https://github.com/manueldois/WebAssembly/tree/master/Sort%20Colors%20Benchmark/src) \([demo](https://manueldois.github.io/WebAssembly/Sort%20Colors%20Benchmark/dist/index.html)\)<br />
  Bench of sorting random colors by hue component on 2d canvas.
* [Wasm Mandelbrot](https://github.com/ColinEberhardt/wasm-mandelbrot) \([demo](https://colineberhardt.github.io/wasm-mandelbrot/#AssemblyScript)\)<br />
  A mandelbrot rendered using a variety of WebAssembly tools \(emscripten, AssemblyScript, asm.js, etc ...\)

## Blockchain

* [ASContract / subscript](https://github.com/ascontract/subscript)<br />
  Substrate smart contract framework written in AssemblyScript.
* [eWasm / Biturbo](https://github.com/ewasm/biturbo)<br />
  Eth1 EE using Turboproofs.
* [ewasm / scout.ts ](https://github.com/ewasm/scout.ts)<br />
  Scout is a Ethereum 2.0 Phase 2 execution prototyping engine \(AssemblyScript Port\).
* [NearProtocol / near-sdk-as](https://github.com/near/near-sdk-as)<br />
  AssemblyScript tools for writing smart contracts for NearProtocol.
* [GraphProtocol / graph-ts](https://github.com/graphprotocol/graph-ts)<br />
  TypeScript/AssemblyScript library for writing mappings for [The Graph](https://thegraph.com).
* [ChainSafe / as-sha256](https://github.com/ChainSafe/as-sha256)<br />
  AssemblyScript implementation of SHA256 for [Lodestar](https://github.com/ChainSafe/lodestar).
* [ParityTech / srml-contracts-waterfall](https://github.com/paritytech/srml-contracts-waterfall)<br />
  Collection of simple Substrate smart contract examples written in Rust and AssemblyScript and tests for Substrates SRML Contracts module.

## Build Tools

* [Zwitterion](https://github.com/lastmjs/zwitterion)<br />
  A web dev server that lets you import anything\*.
* [rollup-plugin-assemblyscript](https://github.com/surma/rollup-plugin-assemblyscript)<br />
  A Rollup plugin that allows you to import AssemblyScript files and compiles them on-the-fly.
* [as-loader](https://github.com/piotr-oles/as-loader)<br />
  A webpack loader for AssemblyScript
* [visitor-as](https://github.com/willemneal/visitor-as)<br />
  Tools for creating compiler transformers.

## Demoscene

* [Hoofdkantoor WASM Demo](https://wasm-demo.codument.com/demo.html)<br />
  A demo built with AssemblyScript (also TS and Web Audio API). It's an homage to the old school Demoscene of the early 90s.

## Editors

* [Fastly Terrarium](https://wasm.fastlylabs.com/)<br />
  A compilation toolchain and sandbox to run WebAssembly server-side, with native support for AssemblyScript.
* [NEAR Protocol Examples](https://examples.near.org/)<br />
  Examples that use [GitPod](https://gitpod.io/) to develop and deploy distributed web apps using NEAR smart contracts authored in AssemblyScript.
* [Iodide Notebook](https://alpha.iodide.io/notebooks/1234)<br />
  Experimental tool for scientific communication and exploration on the web \([more](https://hacks.mozilla.org/2019/03/iodide-an-experimental-tool-for-scientific-communicatiodide-for-scientific-communication-exploration-on-the-web)\).

## Emulators

* [wasmBoy](https://github.com/torch2424/wasmBoy) \([demo](https://wasmboy.app/)\)<br />
  Game Boy / Game Boy Color Emulator Library, written for WebAssembly using AssemblyScript.
* [Atari 2600](https://github.com/ColinEberhardt/atari2600-wasm)<br />
  An Atari 2600 emulator written in AssemblyScript compiled to WebAssembly.
* [as-spectrum-engine](https://github.com/Dotneteer/as-spectrum-engine)<br />
  AssemblyScript implementation of a ZX Spectrum emulator engine.

## Games

* [Chess](https://github.com/mhonert/chess) \([play](https://mhonert.github.io/chess)\)<br />
  A free and open source chess game using AssemblyScript and React.
* [Gomoku WASM](https://github.com/jolestar/gomoku-wasm) \([play](http://jolestar.com/gomoku-wasm)\)<br />
  A Gomoku game implements with WebAssembly using [as2d](https://github.com/as2d/as2d).
* [2d-videogame-in-assemblyscript](https://github.com/ttulka/2d-videogame-in-assemblyscript)<br />
  Demo 2D videogame in AssemblyScript.
* [fiberoptic-game](https://github.com/ameliabradley/fiberoptic-game)<br />
  Web game produced with AssemblyScript for js13k 2018.

## Graphics / Game Frameworks

* [as2d](https://github.com/as2d/as2d)<br />
  \[_Deprecated_\] Bring the power of the CanvasRenderingContext2D prototype to AssemblyScript.
* [koora](https://github.com/mrchantey/koora)<br />
  Assemblyscript 3D Game Framework.
* [as-smallpt](https://github.com/01alchemist/as-smallpt)<br />
  Port of C++ smallpt, a path tracing renderer.
* [Babylon.Font](https://github.com/ycw/Babylon.Font)<br />
  Create 3d text in BabylonJS.
* [Path-Finder](https://github.com/Tugcga/Path-Finder/tree/main/assemblyscript)<br />
  AssemblyScript NavMesh Path Finder.
* [seam-carving-as](https://github.com/alexvictoor/seam-carving-as)<br />
  Seam Carving experiments with AssemblyScript.
* [ASWebGLue](https://github.com/battlelinegames/ASWebGLue)<br />
  WebGL bindings for AssemblyScript.
* [GLAS](https://github.com/lume/glas)<br />
  Web**GL** in **A**ssembly**S**cript, port of [Three.js](https://github.com/mrdoob/three.js/) to AssemblyScript.

## Data Serialization / Deserialization

* [karmem](https://github.com/inkeliz/karmem)<br />
  Karmem is a fast binary serialization format, faster than Google Flatbuffers and optimized for WebAssembly languages.
* [as-proto](https://github.com/piotr-oles/as-proto)<br />
  Protobuf encoder/decoder library.
* [as-json](https://github.com/JairusSW/as-json)<br />
  JSON encoder / decoder.
* [as-msgpack](https://github.com/wapc/as-msgpack)<br />
  MessagePack package for AssemblyScript.
* [assemblyscript-bson](https://github.com/nearprotocol/assemblyscript-bson)<br />
  BSON encoder / decoder.
* [assemblyscript-json](https://github.com/nearprotocol/assemblyscript-json)<br />
  JSON encoder / decoder.
* [AS-LZMA](https://github.com/01alchemist/AS-LZMA)<br />
  LZMA Decoder written in AssemblyScript.

## Crypto (non-blockchain)

* [superfasthash](https://github.com/mjethani/superfasthash)<br />
  An implementation of the SuperFastHash non-cryptographic hashing algorithm in JavaScript and WebAssembly.
* [WASM-Crypto](https://github.com/jedisct1/wasm-crypto)<br />
  An AssemblyScript set of cryptographic primitives for building authentication and key exchange protocols.
* [rabin-wasm](https://github.com/hugomrdias/rabin-wasm)<br />
  Rabin fingerprinting implemented in WASM _\(used by js-ipfs\)_.
* [xoroshiro128starstar](https://github.com/krisselden/xoroshiro128starstar)<br />
  An AssemblyScript port of xoroshiro128starstar.c

## Fixed & Arbitrary Precision Arithmetics

* [as-bignum](https://github.com/MaxGraey/as-bignum)<br />
  Fixed length big numbers like `u128`, `i256`, `fp128` and etc for AssemblyScript.
* [as-big](https://github.com/ttulka/as-big)<br />
  An AssemblyScript library for arbitrary-precision decimal arithmetic.
* [as-bigint](https://github.com/polywrap/as-bigint)<br />
  BigInt is an AssemblyScript class for math with arbitrarily large integers.
* [as-bignumber](https://github.com/polywrap/as-bignumber)<br />
  An AssemblyScript class for math with arbitrary-precision decimal and integer numbers.

## Language Extensions and Types

* [as-container](https://github.com/yjhmelody/as-container) <br />
  AssemblyScript version of Rust Option&lt;T> and Result<O, E> etc.
* [as-variant](https://github.com/MaxGraey/as-variant)<br />
  Variant (aka Any) data type for AssemblyScript.

## Bindings

* [asdom](https://github.com/lume/asdom)<br />
  DOM bindings for AssemblyScript.
* [ecmassembly](https://github.com/aspkg/ecmassembly)<br />
  Bindings for common ECMAScript/JavaScript APIs that require host scheduling (`setTimeout`, `Promise`, etc).
* [wasmbind](https://github.com/miracle2k/wasmbind)<br />
  Work with AssemblyScript memory and classes from Python.
* [as-bind](https://github.com/torch2424/as-bind)<br />
  \[_Deprecated_\] Isomorphic library to handle passing high-level data structures between AssemblyScript and JavaScript, built on top of the AssemblyScript loader.

## Other Libraries

* [ASTL](https://github.com/samchon/astl)<br />
  \[_Deprecated_\] Migration project from C++ STL (Standard Template Library) to AssemblyScript. Containers, iterators, algorithms and functors are supported.
* [Levenshtein Wasm](https://github.com/kyranet/levenshtein-wasm)<br />
  An experimental lightning-fast Wasm-compiled levenshtein library.
* [as-wasi](https://github.com/jedisct1/as-wasi)<br />
  An AssemblyScript API layer for WASI system calls.
* [galois](https://github.com/GuildOfWeavers/galois)<br />
  Arithmetic and polynomial operations in finite fields.
* [merkle](https://github.com/GuildOfWeavers/merkle)<br />
  Merkle tree and other data structures.
* [pixelmatch-asc](https://github.com/jamesmilneruk/pixelmatch-asc)<br />
  Pixel level image comparison library.
* [wasmer-as](https://github.com/onsails/wasmer-as)<br />
  Helpers for dealing with assemblyscript memory inside wasmer-runtime.
* [wasmer3-as](https://github.com/poria-cat/wasmer3-assemblyscript-example)<br/>
  Examples of lift string and lower string in wasmer 3.0
* [io-devices-lib](https://github.com/wasmerio/io-devices-lib)<br />
  Library for interacting with the Wasmer Experimental IO Devices.
* [as-string-sink](https://github.com/MaxGraey/as-string-sink)<br />
  An efficient dynamically sized string buffer (aka String Builder) for AssemblyScript.

## Embedded / IoT

* [wasm3-arduino](https://github.com/wasm3/wasm3-arduino/tree/main/wasm_apps)<br />
  Usage example with wasm3 which run on Arduino, PlatformIO, Particle.
* [Wasm3\_RGB\_Lamp](https://github.com/vshymanskyy/Wasm3_RGB_Lamp)<br />
  Animating an RGB lamp, using WebAssembly \(AssemblyScript\).
* [wasm-arduino-wifi](https://github.com/alvarowolfx/wasm-arduino-wifi)<br />
  Example how update WebAssembly via WiFi on arduino.

## Testing / Benchmarking

* [as-tral](https://github.com/romdotdog/as-tral)<br />
  AssemblyScript benchmarking library inspired by criterion.rs. (Required AssemblyScript >= 0.20)
* [as-pect](https://github.com/jtenner/as-pect)<br />
  A test framework inspired by jest. (Required AssemblyScript <= 0.19)
* [envy](https://github.com/jtenner/envy)<br />
  A test framework spiritual successor of as-pect. (Required AssemblyScript >= 0.20)

## Project Templates

* [worker-assemblyscript-template](https://github.com/JamesLMilner/worker-assemblyscript-template)<br />
  A Cloudflare wrangler template for a AssemblyScript worker.

## Applications

* [wasm-matrix](https://github.com/torch2424/wasm-matrix)<br />
  A Matrix effect in your terminal using AssemblyScript and WASI, deployed to WAPM.
* [WebAssembly music experiment](https://petersalomonsen.com)<br />
  A live coding environment in the browser for sequencing music with javascript and synthesizing instruments in AssemblyScript. Demonstrates compiling AssemblyScript directly in the browser, and live hot-swapping of webassembly modules.
* [WireWorld](https://github.com/dested/WireWorld) \([demo](https://dested.com/projects/wire/)\)<br />
  The Wireworld Computer in Javascript/Canvas.
